First draft (#552)
OctopusDeploy/blog: blog/2021-11/converting-to-tenants-via-api/index.md

---
title: Converting many environments to tenants via the Octopus API
description: Learn how to use the Octopus API to automate the creation of multiple tenants from many existing environments.
author: mark.butler@octopus.com
visibility: public

> published: 2021-11-17-1400

Reviewer: ```suggestion
published: 2022-11-17-1400
```

> published: 2022-11-17-1400

Reviewer: ```suggestion
published: 2021-11-17-1400
```

---
title: Converting many environments to tenants via the Octopus API
description: Learn how to use the Octopus API to automate the creation of multiple tenants from many existing environments.
author: mark.butler@octopus.com
visibility: public
published: 2021-11-17-1400
metaImage: blogimage-convertingenvironmentstotenantsviaoctopusapi-2021.png
bannerImage: blogimage-convertingenvironmentstotenantsviaoctopusapi-2021.png
bannerImageAlt: Environments as 3 colored circles enter a cog API, and come out the other side as tenants represented by people icons in colored circles
isFeatured: false
tags:
 - DevOps
 - Multi-Tenancy
---

> In a previous post, Mark Harrison wrote about the [benefits of multi-tenancy](https://octopus.com/blog/better-multi-tenancy-with-octopus#using-multiple-environments) in Octopus. Designing an application to fit multi-tenancy from the start is easier than retrofitting one, but what should you do with an existing application? I often see people create customer-specific environments when deploying multiple instances of the same application to each of their customers. This can lead to complicated lifecycles, unclear release dashboards, and complex variable scoping for projects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a previous post, Mark Harrison wrote about the [benefits of multi-tenancy](https://octopus.com/blog/better-multi-tenancy-with-octopus#using-multiple-environments) in Octopus. Designing an application to fit multi-tenancy from the start is easier than retrofitting one, but what should you do with an existing application? I often see people create customer-specific environments when they're deploying multiple instances of the same application to each of their customers. This can lead to complicated lifecycles, unclear release dashboards, and complex variable scoping for projects.
```

Fortunately, since Octopus 2.0, the Octopus REST API has been available to help manage multi-tenancy. 

Using a sample project called [Vet Clinic](https://samples.octopus.app/app#/Spaces-682/projects/vet-clinic/deployments), I demonstrate how you can leverage the Octopus REST API and start automating your conversion to multi-tenancy.

## Initial project state

The overview screen of the [Vet Clinic project](https://samples.octopus.app/app#/Spaces-682/projects/vet-clinic/deployments) shows a variety of environments where you can deploy the project. Some of the environments are customer-specific and include the customer name. These are the environments you convert to tenants.

![Vet Clinic project overview](vet-clinic-overview.png)

The project has multiple variables being scoped to each environment to specify the value for the customer. It's the variables scoped to customer environments that you convert to project templates, to provide each tenant you create with the specific variable values for tenanted deployments. 

> Variables scoped to generic environments, such as Development and Test, will be kept as project-specific variables for untenanted deployments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Variables scoped to generic environments, such as Development and Test, are kept as project-specific variables for untenanted deployments.
```

You create a new lifecycle with a single environment for each phase the project can deploy to. The old lifecycle determines which environments each new tenant can have the project deployed to.

![Vet Clinic lifecycle](vet-clinic-lifecycle.png)

## Getting started

To start the conversion process, you create a new project alongside your existing Vet Clinic project. Do this by [cloning the existing project](https://octopus.com/docs/projects#clone-a-project). The clone allows you to test changes in parallel, without worrying about mishaps disrupting your current project's deployments. 

After you're happy with results on the cloned project, remove it and run the conversions scripts on the original project. Alternatively, you can move everything to the new, cloned project and eventually retire the original project.

:::hint
To connect tenants to a project, you need to enable tenanted deployments on that project. You can read our [documentation on tenanted deployment](https://octopus.com/docs/tenants/tenant-creation/tenanted-deployments) to learn how.
:::

![Vet Clinic tenanted project overview](vet-clinic-tenanted-overview.png)

> Next, you create a new simplified lifecycle for the project to use after the conversion is complete. Each phase in the lifecycle has a single environment to deploy to, which offers a more comprehensive view of what release has deployed to which environment and tenant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, you create a new, simplified lifecycle for the project to use after the conversion is complete. Each phase in the lifecycle has a single environment to deploy to, which offers a more comprehensive view of what release has deployed to which environment and tenant.
```

![Vet Clinic tenanted lifecycle](vet-clinic-tenanted-lifecycle.png)

## Creating the scripts

:::hint 
The examples provided are for reference and should be modified and tested prior to using in a production Octopus instance. 
:::

> With those two pieces in place, you can start creating our scripts. For the first script, you create the tenants from the old environments. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With those two pieces in place, you can start creating your scripts. For the first script, you create the tenants from the old environments. 
```

# Update the new projects templates
Invoke-RestMethod -Method Put -Uri "$octopusURL/api/$($space.Id)/projects/$($newProject.Id)" -Headers $header -Body ($newProject | ConvertTo-Json -Depth 10)

# Loop through old variables again to update tenant variable values after the project templates have been created
foreach ($oldVariable in $oldVariableSet.Variables) {
    New-Template-Values($oldVariable)
}

```
</p>
</details>

## End result

After running the two scripts against the Vet Clinic project, you can see the new items the scripts created. 

On the tenant dashboard, you can now see three different tenants:

![Vet Clinic tenants](vet-clinic-tenants.png)

The *Vet Clinic - Tenanted* project now only has project variables scoped to new environments:

![Vet Clinic Tenanted project variables](vet-clinic-tenanted-project-variables.png)

The project also includes the new variable templates to provide a value for each tenant:

![Vet Clinic Tenanted project variable templates](vet-clinic-tenanted-project-variable-templates.png)

> Inside each new tenant, the variable values have been updated for each environment using the scope and value from the old project variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inside each new tenant, the variable values have been updated for each environment using the scope and value from the old project variables:
```
